# Prediction of Rock Climbing Skill Via Various ML Techniques
## Background
In the sport of rock climbing, the measurement of an individual’s skill level has always been somewhat of a contentious topic. Climbing skill can be fundamentally broken into two elements that contribute to performance: technique and strength. Technique is exceptionally hard to quantify, whereas strength can be measured in a multitude of ways. Therefore, it is indicative that strength will be interesting option to perform data analysis on in order to see how it contributes to an individual’s climbing ability. In order for us to quantify the connection between ability and strength, we can see how different strength metrics contribute to the differences between certain individual’s ability to climb routes graded with specific difficulty. In rock climbing, most routes are given a specific difficulty rating by the first ascentionist, the first person to climb the route, and based solely on their difficulty to complete without falling. Because this system relies heavily on the first ascentionist, it is inherently quite subjective. For this reason, we can focus on one particular difficulty scale that can help eliminate some of the potential bias. For boulder problems, shorter routes that are usually below 20ft tall and climbed sans rope, are graded with the V-scale which ranges sequentially from V0 being the easiest all the way to V17 being the hardest. Because boulder problems are so short, the V-scale is an excellent option for us to base our analysis off of due to their grade representing condensed difficulty rather than longer roped routes which may present other biases from the first ascentionist and other factors. So, if we were to measure climbing skill based off of this V-scale, we can devise a model that helps us take in metrics such as strength and determine their relationship with climbing grade difficulty. Ultimately, the goal of this assessment is to build a model that will allow individuals to predict their climbing difficulty grade based on their physical attributes, while also providing insight as to how improvement in specific areas may contribute to the greatest increase in overall skill.

## Data Information

For the construction of a model, we can use one of the multitude of public climbing surveys on the internet to gather the required data. Specifically, we will use a data sample taken from a 2017 survey across the internet forums of climbing (Reddit, Mountain Project, etc) orchestrated by the user u/higiff on the r/climbharder sub-Reddit. The original post containing the survey link can be found [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/climbharder/comments/5qszhe/climbharder_training_survey/). Likewise, the results from the survey are collected in a Google Sheets page that can found here: [Google Sheets Survey Results](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1J6d45EqIlIsIqNdi2X-Zl-EGFxf9d9T3R_W55xrpEAs/edit?gid=1650492946#gid=1650492946).

The survey results are formatted as a dataset that contains 630 total user submissions with 35 variables that we can analyze to formulate our model. In the dataset, there are both variables that are of extreme importance to our model as well as variables that don’t strictly contribute to our model building. Most importantly, our data includes three different response variables that we have the option to build our model on. The variables “Hardest V-Grade Ever Climbed”, “Hardest V-Grade Climbed in Last 3 Months”, and “Hardest V-Grade You Can Send 90% to 100% of the Time” all tell us something different about the individual’s climbing ability.

Firstly, the variable showing the hardest v-grade ever climbed tells us the single hardest boulder an individual has done. Initially, this seems like the most appropriate variable to build upon, as it demonstrates exactly what we are looking for in our proposed study question. However, it is important to realize that this variable may not be the best representation of climbing skill as, like stated before, boulders inherently display a bias towards different body sizes depending on the boulder. Likewise, the second variable given may pertain some bias as it is less likely that all individuals have climb boulders that accurately represent their overall climbing ability within the last three months. For these reasons, it would probably be a more accurate representation of overall skill if we model our findings on the third variable, “Hardest V-Grade You Can Send 90% to 100% of the Time” as exemplify an individual’s overall skill better than the other variables. Therefore, we will be using this variable as our response variable for our model fit. It is important to note that while the first two variables may not justify the extent of model building, the information that they provide may still be quite informative to some degree, but their inclusion/exclusion in our model should not influence it’s accuracy.

As for predictor variables, the data set in question has a decent number that we can potentially use in order to develop our model. “Frequency of Climbing Sessions Per Week”, “Hours Spent Training”, “Maximum Pull-ups”, and “General Strength Training Frequency” are just some of the variables that are good candidates that this analysis will base it's predictions on. We will go into what these variables later as their individual significance become prevalent. For now, information on all the variables can be found in the data set climbing_codebook.
